The SEC approved those eleven applications to create the first-ever bitcoin spot ETPs[#fn-etp] that I mentioned last week [I48]. Although most people knew it was coming, this was still big news in the crypto industry, which has been awaiting such a product for more than ten years.

The approval came with it a statement from SEC Chairman Gary Gensler, and I've honestly got to hand it to him as a writer. I've heard people speak through gritted teeth before, but I'm not sure I've ever read anything so clearly written through gritted teeth until now. With all the sincerity of an apology that starts with "my mom said I have to apologize," Gensler announced the approval (which he voted for), explaining that the SEC was left with little choice but to approve the applications after an appellate court overturned a previous rejection decision [I38]. He ended his statement with a firm condemnation of bitcoin:[#ref-gensler]

Though we’re merit neutral, I’d note that the underlying assets in the metals ETPs have consumer and industrial uses, while in contrast bitcoin is primarily a speculative, volatile asset that’s also used for illicit activity including ransomware, money laundering, sanction evasion, and terrorist financing. While we approved the listing and trading of certain spot bitcoin ETP shares today, we did not approve or endorse bitcoin. Investors should remain cautious about the myriad risks associated with bitcoin and products whose value is tied to crypto.

Three other SEC Commissioners also issued statements: the historically crypto-loving Hester Peirce celebrated the approval and condemned her own agency for taking so long to get around to it.[#ref-peirce] Similarly, Mark Uyeda spoke positively about the approval while criticizing the SEC's process.[#ref-uyeda]

Caroline Crenshaw, who voted against the approval, issued a strongly critical statement, writing that the agency's "actions are unsound and ahistorical. And worse, they put us on a wayward path that could further sacrifice investor protection."[#ref-crenshaw] You would not imagine my surprise when I noticed she'd cited my work in her dissenting statement! (Footnote 16). Jaime Lizárraga also dissented, but did not issue a statement of his own.

[fn-etp] Despite being broadly referred to as "Bitcoin ETFs" (including by me), these are apparently actually exchange-traded products (ETPs), not exchange-traded funds (ETFs).

[ref-gensler] "Statement on the Approval of Spot Bitcoin Exchange-Traded Products" by Gary Gensler. U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission.
[ref-peirce] "Out, Damned Spot! Out, I Say!: Statement on Omnibus Approval Order for List and Trade Bitcoin-Based Commodity-Based Trust Shares and Trust Units", Hester Peirce. U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission.
[ref-uyeda] "Statement Regarding the Commission’s Approval of Proposed Rule Changes to List and Trade Shares of Spot Bitcoin Exchange-Traded Products" by Mark Uyeda. U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission.
[ref-crenshaw] "Statement Dissenting from Approval of Proposed Rule Changes to List and Trade Spot Bitcoin Exchange-Traded Products" by Caroline Crenshaw. U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission.